Architectural Thinking Workshop
Exercise 5: Logical & Physical Operational Models
(Exercise Description)
IBM Professional Series: Architectural Thinking Workshop
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This
IBM Client Education Version 7 document may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Exercise 5: Logical and Physical Operational Models
During this exercise we want you to create a complete Logical Operational Model and (unsized)
Physical Operational Model views.
LOM: Go through the following steps:
 Use the Location and Deployment Unit Models from the results of your previous exercise
 Place Actors and Logical Nodes within the Location Model together with their connections (i.e.,
access and integration mechanisms)
 Create a complete LOM by placing Deployment Units within the nodes
POM: Go through the following steps:
 Based on the LOM you have completed, create the Physical Operational Model (POM)
 Consider how key NFRs will affect translation of Logical Nodes into Physical Nodes
 What additional technologies and Physical Nodes will be required to satisfy the key NFRs
Be ready with:
 A complete Logical Operational Model
 A complete (unsized) Physical Operational Model
2 IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document may
Architectural Thinking Workshop not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

THANK YOU
IBM, the IBM logo, and ibm.com are trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked terms are marked on their first occurrence in this
information with a trademark symbol (® or ™), these symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law trademarks owned by IBM at
the time this information was published. Such trademarks may also be registered or common law trademarks in other countries. A
current list of IBM trademarks is available on the Web at "Copyright and trademark information.“ Java and all Java-based
trademarks and logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of Oracle and its affiliates.
Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, or other countries, or both. Microsoft, Excel, PowerPoint, Project,
Visio, Word, and Windows are trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other countries, or both. UML is a
registered trademark of Object Management Group, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. TOGAF and UNIX are
registered trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, product, and service names
may be trademarks of IBM or other companies. Citrix is a trademark of Citrix Systems, Inc. and one or more of its subsidiaries, and
may be registered in the United States Patent and Trademark Office and in other countries.
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document may
3
Architectural Thinking Workshop not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

