Architectural Thinking Workshop
Exercise 6: Agile: Initial Architecture
IBM Professional Series: Architectural Thinking Workshop
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This
IBM Client Education Version 7 document may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

So what do we mean by “…Initial Architecture…”?
▪ Identify high-level
scope
▪ Identify initial
requirements
▪ Identify and
architecture vision
Design Thinking / Project Initiation /
Scoping Workshops Feasibility / Sprint 0
2-3 days 1 – 2 weeks
Initial Requirements
Initial Architecture
Architecture-on-a-page
with annotations
2 IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document may
Architectural Thinking Workshop not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Exercise 6: Agile – architecture-on-a-page
During this exercise we want you to create a complete two viewpoints in line with
recommendations on “initial architecture’:
• Architecture-on-a-page
• Initial Security Viewpoint
Use:
• ATW Case Study Background
• Examples from the lecture materials
• Ensure all critical elements are covered
Be ready with:
Two viewpoints from initial architecture
Use PowerPoint to document your viewpoints
3 IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document may
Architectural Thinking Workshop not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

THANK YOU
IBM, the IBM logo, and ibm.com are trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked terms are marked on their first occurrence in this
information with a trademark symbol (® or ™), these symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law trademarks owned by IBM at
the time this information was published. Such trademarks may also be registered or common law trademarks in other countries. A
current list of IBM trademarks is available on the Web at "Copyright and trademark information.“ Java and all Java-based
trademarks and logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of Oracle and its affiliates.
Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, or other countries, or both. Microsoft, Excel, PowerPoint, Project,
Visio, Word, and Windows are trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other countries, or both. UML is a
registered trademark of Object Management Group, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. TOGAF and UNIX are
registered trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, product, and service names
may be trademarks of IBM or other companies. Citrix is a trademark of Citrix Systems, Inc. and one or more of its subsidiaries, and
may be registered in the United States Patent and Trademark Office and in other countries.
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document may
4 Architectural Thinking Workshop not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

