Architectural Thinking Workshop
Case Study Introduction – Electronic Census System (ECS)
IBM Professional Series: Architectural Thinking Workshop
IBM Client Education Version 7 IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This
document may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Contents
• Case Study Objectives
• Client and project background
• Business requirements
• Case Study Approach
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
2 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Case study objectives
The objectives of this case study are to give you:
A clearer, more thorough understanding of what it means to think
•
architecturally, from all perspectives, about the IT solution design to a
specific business problem, and therefore allow you to gain confidence in
your own ability to think the right way
A safe environment in which to experiment with various approaches to
•
thinking this way, thus reinforcing the knowledge and skills you’ve gained
from this course
The opportunity to learn from others on your team through sharing
•
knowledge
An appreciation of how, even at the earliest stages of a project, important
•
design decisions and trade-offs almost always occur
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
3 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Client and project background
Republic of Bolumbia
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
4 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

The client
~ 23 Million People
~ 9.5 Million Dwellings
Department of Statistics (DoS)
Republic of Bolumbia
Collects and analyses information about various
aspects of the country including its population,
society, health and the economy to name the key
areas
The department has been running a Population
and Housing Census for over 100 years and in
recent history the Census has run every 5 years,
the next census being 3 year from now.
DoS Mission:
• Assist and encourage informed decision
making;
• Research and discussion within
government and the community, by leading
a high quality, objective and responsive
national statistical service.
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
5 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Business need and project objectives
• Business need
• The Census of Population and Housing is the largest statistical collection undertaken by the DoS and
one of the most important.
• Its objective is to accurately measure the number and key characteristics of people who are in Bolumbia on
Census Night, and of the dwellings in which they live.
• To date the Census has been done manually distributing and collecting paper forms from each household
and business in the country before entering this information into a computer system.
• In line with DoS’ continual improvements program, effort has been expended in order to improve and
expand communications channels to, and from the public. The ECS initiative represents a significant
step in this process as it embraces the internet as a viable, and powerful, communications medium.
• Project objectives
• The ECS initiative is to provide the Bolumbian population with the ability to complete the next Census
questionnaire electronically over the Internet and must address the following DoS objectives:
• Responds to public requests for increased flexibility in methods of completing Census materials.
• Capitalizes on the internet as a viable communications channel.
• Meets DoS obligations under the Electronic Transactions Act 2009.
• Provides online support of the next Census.
• Maintains the privacy & perception of privacy, in that DoS holds a unique security access key to the
managed data, and only staff employed under the Statistics Act can access the raw respondent data.
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
6 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

ECS Project scope
• The ECS proposal that you are being asked to respond to includes the following
elements:
• Definition of a solution for capturing Census information electronically via the internet through
the Census period of one week
• Implementation of the solution including testing and production deployment
• Hosting services during the length of the project (i.e. through development and production)
• Supporting the application and infrastructure (i.e. full support for the overall solution)
• The ECS proposal does not include:
• Systems to analyze Census information collected (this is the subject of another proposal)
• Non-private dwellings: These responses will be paper-based for this first release of ECS.
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
7 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Business Process
DoS
10
8
Census forms Census Help Desk
Forms
Processing
SMS message Data
Census
Electronic
Collector 6
2 Census
Processing
Census form
delivery Mobile
phone network
11
5 7
3 Production
4
Internet ECS
Optional ECS
Respondent response
Dwelling (1 of 9,500,000)
1
9
Organisational information (documents etc.)
Developer Tester
Paper forms and related data Application Support Staff
development Support
Collector notification data
ECS respondent and management data New ECS Hosting
Broken line (any colour) represents optional path Environment
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
8 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Census form structure
Census Form
Address Person Dwelling Feedback
Section Section Section Section
Person Pages Dwelling Feedback
Address Page
P P e e r(s r2o s1o n)n P P a a g g e e DPwaeglelins g(6 P)age Page
Person Page
Person Page
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
9 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Case Study Approach
• Over the next few days, we’ll use Electronic Census System
(ECS) to explore architectural thinking.
• We’ll do this using a repeating cycle:
• Lectures on an aspect of architecture
• An exercise
– Working in teams
• Presentation and review
• Discussion on key learning points
– and presentation of sample answer
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
10 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Exercise Approach
Exercise 01
Case Study Create Use Case
Background Model; Develop
System Context
and Initial NFRs
Requirements
Spec Model Answer
Exercise 02
Develop
Architecture
Overview Diagram
(AOD)
AOD Model Answer
Exercise 03 Exercise 04 & 05
AOD & CM
Develop Develop Operational
Model Answer
Component Model Model (LOM & POM)
Exercise 06
Determine Hot
Spots Complete SAD
Model Answer
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
11 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

Questions?
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
12 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

THANK YOU
IBM, the IBM logo, and ibm.com are trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation in the
United States, other countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked terms are marked on their first occurrence in this
information with a trademark symbol (® or ™), these symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law trademarks owned by IBM at
the time this information was published. Such trademarks may also be registered or common law trademarks in other countries. A
current list of IBM trademarks is available on the Web at "Copyright and trademark information.“ Java and all Java-based
trademarks and logos are trademarks or registered trademarks of Oracle and its affiliates.
Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, or other countries, or both. Microsoft, Excel, PowerPoint, Project,
Visio, Word, and Windows are trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other countries, or both. UML is a
registered trademark of Object Management Group, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. TOGAF and UNIX are
registered trademarks of The Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, product, and service names
may be trademarks of IBM or other companies. Citrix is a trademark of Citrix Systems, Inc. and one or more of its subsidiaries, and
may be registered in the United States Patent and Trademark Office and in other countries.
IBM Confidential. © Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2017. All Rights Reserved. This document
13 Architectural Thinking Workshop may not be copied distributed or reproduced in whole or in part without the prior written consent of IBM.

