Functional Aspect
Version 7.0

Module outline
↘ Introduction and Objectives
↘ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↘ Component modeling
↘ Building a component model
↘ Identifying components
↘ Specifying components
↘ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
2

Module outline
→ Introduction and Objectives
↘ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↘ Component modeling
↘ Building a component model
↘ Identifying components
↘ Specifying components
↘ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
3

Learning Objective
At the end of this module, you should be able to:
• Describe what is meant by the functional aspect of IT architecture and how it can be modelled in a
variety of ways
• Component and Service modelling
• Data modeling
• Describe in detail one way of modeling the functional aspect through component modelling
• Describe what makes a “good” component
• Describe some of the key principles used in building component models
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
4

Module outline
↗ Introduction and Objectives
→ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↘ Component modeling
↘ Building a component model
↘ Identifying components
↘ Specifying components
↘ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
5

Functional Aspect with a Component Model
Why Model
• Today's complex, software-intensive systems cannot be understood without models.
• Models break down complex systems into smaller parts – components, that have well understood functional
responsibilities. It helps us visualize and understand the system.
Functional viewpoint is one of the fundamental viewpoints that uses Component Model to describe
the system’s functional aspects
Component Model is a formal representation of:
• the internal Structure of the solution (the relationships between the components that make up the solution), i.e. Static View, and solution Behaviour, i.e. Dynamic View.
• a next step from the System Context Diagram that aligns with the Black Box engineering principle to the White Box principle, whereby the architects look at “what’s inside the
solution”
• provides the necessary input for the operational model to make proper placement decisions about the components’ various aspects:
• Where should the components run?
• Where should the components’ data be?
• Where should the components be installed?
• How will the components communicate with each other?
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
6

The functional aspect of an IT system can be modelled in a variety of ways
Component and Service modelling:
• Reasoning about the structure and behavior of the system as a set of interrelated and interacting “ lumps of functionality” –
*
Components
• Components’ capabilities are modeled in terms of what they can do, the activities they can perform, and the information they
are responsible for.
• Components work together through the exchange of information via interfaces.
• Components can manifest themselves as Services that are accessible through their interfaces or APIs that are exposed via a
contract (e.g. method signature, JSON schema, WSDL, etc)
Data modelling:
• Reasoning about the structure and relationships between the system’s information entities
• Data modeling is a key part of information architecture, which also considers the informational parts of requirements,
operational, and viability aspects
The focus of this module is on modeling the Functional Aspect via Component Modeling.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
7

The component model is used as input into a number of activities
In application development or customization:
• Work allocation
• Version control
• Design strategy
• Reuse
• Testing
• Project management
• Product or Package selection
In the operational aspect:
• The things that have to be deployed
* *
In operations:
• Systems management and so on
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
8

A Component is a primary concept used for describing the functional aspect of the IT architecture
• A component is a modular unit of functionality.
• A component makes its functionality and state available through one or more interfaces.
“State” – the information
• Examples of components are: managed by the component
• At the application level of the component model:
• Business processing components (such as the Customer Processing component)
• Business service components (such as the Account Manager component)
• At the technical level of the component model:
• Technical components (security services or middleware such as messaging or transaction software)
• System software components (such as an operating system)
• Hardware components (such as an encryption device)
• A component is not just a programming-level concept such as an Oracle EJB or .NET component.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
9

Components and Services
Components invoke each other, Using a Black Box engineering This approach is at the heart of SOA Services and components are
* * * * *
offering principle, we focus on what the or API Integration architecture interrelated:
and requesting information via components’ interfaces (or APIs) styles.
• Components offer and request services
“messages” offer rather than how the requested
via their Service Interfaces or APIs
that flow between them. function is realized. We still need to
• Services are satisfied by components,
“look inside” components when it’s
which, if necessary, request services
time to decide how their functions
from other components.
will be realized
component
service
Component-centric View
Service-centric View
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
10

Components may be grouped into subsystems
Subsystem: An interesting group of any number of any model elements
• Customer Management subsystem, Security subsystem, Printing subsystem, Order Management subsystem, Data Distribution
subsystem.
• Model elements can be simultaneously in any number of subsystems.
• A subsystem has no intrinsic capabilities; it is simply an identifier.
Subsystems are commonly found in component models, where they enable the modeler to:
• Label major parts of an IT system, such as the “Accounting” subsystem
• Identify a commercial software product or package, such as CICS or SAP
• Allocate work to development groups (platform teams)
In the context of component modeling, since it is “just a label,” a subsystem does not have its own interfaces.
Interfaces “to the subsystem” are actually interfaces on components in the subsystem.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
11

Module outline
↗ Introduction and Objectives
↗ The functional aspect of IT architecture
→ Component modeling
↘ Building a component model
↘ Identifying components
↘ Specifying components
↘ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
12

Unified Modeling Language is one of the notations used for Component Modeling
Unified Modeling Language (UML) is:
• A graphical notation, supported by a single metamodel, for describing software systems.
• An open standard controlled by the Object Management Group (OMG); Version 2.5 was
released in October 2015.
• Based on a unification of the modeling work of Grady Booch, Jim Rumbaugh, and Ivar
Jacobson.
• One of the most influential formal notations in software engineering and architecture, also
supported by a large number of tools.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
13

Component modeling enables the functional aspect to focus …
UML Class Notation UML Sequence Diagram
… on the system’s internal structure, described in a Component … as well as, its behavior, shown in a Component Interaction
Relationship Diagram Diagram
Dynamic View
Static View
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
14

Components can be classified as …
Application vs Technical:
• Application Components implement a specific business function within the IT system (e.g. Payment Component)
• Technical Components are NOT associated with a specific business function. They play a technical role that supports realization
of other components and supports facilitation of their non-functional requirements (e.g. a Web Server, Hypervisor, DNS Server)
Logical vs Physical
• Logical: focuses on the functional responsibility and purpose of the of the solution components without being concerned of
their implementation
• Physical: Represents actual concrete software or hardware technology, a product/package used for component
implementation. These are decision usually made during the Component Implementation stage (see next slide)
A component model evolves during the course of a project in a number of ways:
• Elaboration increases the level of completeness.
• Refinement increases the level of precision.
• Implementation takes place between the logical and physical levels:
• Logical components are implemented by physical components.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
15

Three steps of component modeling technique
What are the components? Component identification:
a. Review architectural patterns, reference architectures, and reusable assets
b. Partition into subsystems and components and assign functional
responsibilities
c. Structure ensuring loose coupling, high cohesion, and other good qualities
Component specification:
What are their Interfaces?
a. Specify interfaces
n
o b. Specify operations and signatures
I
t
a c. Specify pre- and post-conditions
r
o
b
a
l
E
Component implementation:
How can we realize the components?
a. Define implementation approach, make realization decisions
b. Identify products and packages
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
16

Each step is applied, to varying degrees, at different points in the delivery process
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
17

Module outline
↗ Introduction and Objectives
↗ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↗ Component modeling
→ Building a component model
→ Identifying components
↘ Specifying components
↘ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
18

Step 1: Component identification: What are the components?
Component identification is the first step of the component modeling technique and involves the following. Driven
by an understanding of the business requirements the Architect will:
• Partition the system into subsystems and components and assign responsibilities based on an analysis of the requirements.
• Use a reference architecture, architectural patterns, and other reusable assets that can be used as a starting point
• Ensure the components are well structured, so that they are:
• Highly cohesive
• Do the responsibilities assigned to a component make sense?
• Loosely coupled
• Are two or more components too dependent on each other?
• Well isolated
• Have product or technology dependencies been confined to a few places?
• Of the right granularity
• Have sufficient responsibilities been allocated to the component?
• Layered according to their generality
Step 1: Component Identification
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
19

Cohesion is a measure of the strength of the dependencies within a component
* *
Strength of the dependencies within a component
High
Low
• Responsibilities have no meaningful relationship to each • Responsibilities contribute to a few related business
other. activities only.
• Responsibilities are related in time only. • Responsibilities are likely to use the same input or output
• Responsibilities are of the same general category that is data.
selected externally. • Responsibilities are likely to be used together.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
20

Low or high cohesion? Good or bad?
Handles user input
Handles display of user information
Handles different functions: search and
stock availability
Handles overall control
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
21

An example of high cohesion: Good
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
22

Coupling is a measure of the strength of the dependencies between components
Strength of dependencies between the components
Loose
Strong
• Data that is intended to control the internal component • There is no unnecessary inter-component
logic is passed . communication: Don’t Talk to Strangers.
• Components refer to the same global data area. • Communication is via fundamental data types.
• One component refers to the inside of another. • If communication is via composite data, then it is self-
• Different meanings are assigned to different parts of a describing data, such as XML.
range of data.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
23

An example of strong coupling: Bad
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
24

An example of loose coupling: Good
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
25

Isolation is a measure of the degree to which product and technology dependencies are
isolated
Degree of isolation of product/technology dependencies
High
Low
• Every component has a dependency on the product- • Product and technology dependencies are decoupled.
specific or technology-specific aspects of other • Patterns, such as the Gang of Four* “Proxy,” “Bridge,”
components. and “Mediator” or GRASP** “Indirection” are used.
• There is no use of patterns.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
26

Granularity is a measure of the size or amount of functionality assigned to a component
Level of functionality assigned to a component
Fine Course
• An autonomous business
• A software element called at run • A set of cooperating business
concept or business process
time with a clear interface and a components assembled to deliver a
separation between interface solution to a business problem
• Also known as a *business
and implementation component • Also known as a *system-level
• Also known as a *distributed component.
component.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
27

Layering involves separating out components according to their generality
• Layering provides a logical partitioning of components into a
number of sets or layers.
• Rules define relationships between layers:
• Strict: Components only depend on components in the same
layer or the one below.
• Non-Strict: Components may depend on components in any
lower layer.
• Layering provides a way to restrict inter-component
dependencies.
• Well-layered systems are more loosely coupled and therefore
more easily maintained.
Example:
• Dialog control layer
• Business processing layer - use case step logic and
choreography.
• Business services layer - general business components, may
be used in several applications.
• Middleware layer - interfaces to databases and operating
system services.
• System software layer - components of operating systems and
databases.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
28

Partitioning
Partition into subsystems and components and assign responsibilities; identify interfaces to external systems.
Add components to
manage each interface
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
29

Identifying components for architecturally significant use cases
• Partition into subsystems and components and assign
responsibilities; identifying components for
architecturally significant use cases.
• The actor requests a stock query.
• The system prompts the actor to select a store name
and enter an article or product name or number.
• The actor selects a store name and enters an article or
product name. If a product name is entered, the user
may also be required to specify further selection
criteria, such as selecting color and so on, for that
product.
• The system searches for the entered article or product
in the selected store and checks its availability.
• The system determines that the article or product is
available.
• The system returns the availability information for the
article or product.
• The use case ends successfully.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
30

Partition into subsystems and components and assign responsibilities to component
• Handle stock requests
• Request product information
• Perform search
• Determine availability
• Provide availability information
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
31

Review architectural patterns, reference architectures, and reusable assets
Review architectural patterns, reference architectures, and reusable assets to derive an initial set of
components
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
32

The completion of the component identification step
At the completion of the component identification step, there should be:
• An initial set of components with associated responsibilities. This may be documented as a
Component or Service Catalog
• One or more component relationship diagrams showing dependencies between components
• One or more component interaction diagrams showing collaborations between components
• Subsequent steps will:
• (2) Specify components: interfaces, operations, and signatures
• (3) Show how logical components are implemented into physical components
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
33

Module outline
↗ Introduction and Objectives
↗ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↗ Component modeling
→ Building a component model
↗ Identifying components
→ Specifying components
↘ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
34

Step 2: Component specification: What are the Interfaces?
Component specification is the second step of the component modeling technique and involves:
• Defining component interfaces by separating out the responsibilities placed on the components
• For each interface, specifying the operations and their signatures, that is, parameters passed and return values
• For each operation, specifying its contract of behavior or pre- and post-conditions
Step 2: Component Specification
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
35

There are various approaches to identifying interfaces on IT components,
depending on which layer they are in
Use Case
Data Model
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
36

Identifying business processing component interfaces from use cases
1.The actor requests a stock query.
2.The system prompts for the actor to select a store name and enter
an article or product name or number.
3.The actor selects a store name and enters an article or product
name. If a product name is entered, the user may also be required
to specify further selection criteria (for example, selecting color) for
that product.
4.The system searches for the selected article or product in the
named store and checks its availability.
5.The system determines the article or product is available.
6.The system returns the availability information for the article or
product.
7.The use case ends successfully.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
37

Identifying business service component interfaces from business entities
1 2
1
3
1. Produce a logical data model showing business
entities.
3 1
1
2. Identify core business entities.
1 2
3. Create interfaces and operations to manage core 1 1
business entities.
1
1
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
38

Layering involves separating out components according to their generality
• For each operation identified, decide what data flows
in and out. Make decisions about what data is required
to provide the required functionality.
• Look at the collaborations between components in
component interaction diagrams.
• Create structured data types as appropriate. Later in
the cycle, we will use the modelling structures aligned
with the implementation technology (e.g. method
signature, JSON schema, WSDL, etc).
Let’s look at the interaction searchForAvailability:
• A store name and a product name, both strings, are
required as input.
• The quantity available in the store will be returned.
• The signature then becomes:
searchForAvailability (storeName:String,
product:String):Integer
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
39

The completion of the component specification step
There should be a refined component model with:
• Defined component interfaces by separating out the responsibilities placed on the components:
• For each interface, specifying the operations and their signatures, that is, parameters passed and return values
• For each operation, specifying its contract of behavior or pre- and post-conditions
Subsequent step will:
• Map the specified components to the appropriate products, packages, and custom-built applications; an
architecture decision needs to be taken
• Identify implementation approach of physical components
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
40

Module outline
↗ Introduction and Objectives
↗ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↗ Component modeling
→ Building a component model
↗ Identifying components
↗ Specifying components
→ Implementing components
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
41

Step 3: Component implementation: How can we realize the components?
Component Implementation is the third step of the component modeling technique and involves:
• For those components that are to be implemented using commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) products, map the
specified-level components to the
• appropriate products or packages.
• For those components that are to be built, identify the approach to implementation by defining the physical-
level components. Use patterns or other assets to help in this definition.
• And don’t forget that many components will be realized as standard technologies defined with selection criteria
in the EA.
• Whether at the *IS* level of IT business functionality
• Or the *technology* level of IT middleware and so on
• Enterprise Architectures frequently adopt the Reuse before Customise before Buy before Build guideline.
Step 3: Component
Implementation
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
42

Step 3: Component implementation: How can we realize the components?
During component implementation, the logical-level
Logical
Level
model is transformed into a physical-level model
• Decisions must be made as to what technology
best realizes the specified-level components.
• Implementing a specified-level component Component
Definition
Implementation
model into a physical-level component model
Tool (selection)
involves:
• Selecting products and packages
• Identifying frameworks and patterns
Physical
• Deciding what components have to be Level
developed
• Making choices about what technology
should be used to realize the components Component
Definition
Implementation
• There can be more than one physical component
(development)
Tool
model for each specified-level model.
• Strictly speaking, this notion of component
implementation is implementation selection, to
be followed by application development or Code
package customization.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
43

Module outline
↗ Introduction and Objectives
↗ The functional aspect of IT architecture
↗ Component modeling
↗ Building a component model
↗Identifying components
↗Specifying components
↗ Implementing components
→ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
44

Step 3: Component implementation: How can we realize the components?
The Functional Aspect of a system’s IT architecture use Component Modeling techniques to define the models.
Component Modeling describes the functional structure and behavior of the system’s IT architecture via
components.
• Components’ capabilities are modeled in terms of what they can do, the activities they can perform and the
information they are responsible for.
• Components work together through the exchange of messages sent and received via interfaces.
Component models can include:
• Static, structural views and dynamic, behavioral views
• Application and technical levels
• Logical and physical perspectives
Component modeling consists of three steps:
• Component Identification
• Component Specification
• Component Implementation
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
45

References
[BACHMANN00] Bachmann, et al. Software Architecture Documentation in Practice: Documenting Architectural Layers, SEI, March 2000
[BOOCH93] Booch, Grady. Object Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications, Benjamin Cummings, 1993, ISBN: 0805353402
[CHEESMAN00] Cheesman, John and Daniels, John. UML Components, Addison-Wesley, 2000, ISBN: 0201708510
[GAMMA95] Gamma, Erich, et al. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object Oriented Software, Addison-Wesley, 1995, ISBN:
0201633612
[HERZUM99] Herzum, Peter and Sims, Oliver. Business Component Factory - A Comprehensive Overview of Component-based
Development for the Enterprise, John Wiley, 1999, ISBN: 0471327603
[JACONSON94] Jacobsen, Ivar, et al. Object Oriented Software Engineering: A Use Case Driven Approach, Addison Wesley, 1994, ISBN:
0201544350
[MEYER97] Meyer, Bertrend. Object-Oriented Software Construction (2nd Edition), Prentice-Hall, 1997, ISBN: 0136291554
[PAGE-JONES88] Page-Jones, Meiler. The Practical Guide to Structured Systems Design, Prentice Hall, 1988, ISBN: 0136907776
[WIRFS-BROCK90] Wirfs-Brock, Rebecca, et al. Designing Object Oriented Software, Prentice Hall, 1990, ISBN: 0136298257
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
46

Thank you
IBM, the IBM logo, and ibm.com are trademarks or
registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation in the United States, other
countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked
terms are marked on their first occurrence in this
information with a trademark symbol (® or TM), these
symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law
trademarks owned by IBM at the time this information
was published. Such trademarks may also be
registered or common law trademarks in other
countries. A current list of IBM trademarks is available
on the Web at "Copyright and trademark information."
Java and all Java-based trademarks and logos are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Oracle and its
affiliates.
Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United
States, or other countries, or both. Microsoft, Excel,
PowerPoint, Project, Visio, Word, and Windows are
trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the United
States, other countries, or both. UML is a registered
trademark of Object Management Group, Inc. in the
United States and/or other countries. TOGAF and
UNIX are registered trademarks of The Open Group in
the United States and other countries. Other company,
product, and service names may be trademarks of IBM
or other companies. Citrix is a trademark of Citrix
Systems, Inc. and one or more of its subsidiaries, and
may be registered in the United States Patent and
Trademark Office and in other countries.
47

