Validation and
Viability
Version 7

Table of Contents
↘ Introducing and objectives
↘ Viability
↘ Validation
↘ Approaches to viability and validation
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
2

Table of Contents
→ Introducing and objectives
↘ Viability
↘ Validation
↘ Approaches to viability and validation
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
3

Learning objectives
At the end of this module, you should be able to:
• Describe
• Technical reviews and their relationship to the quality assurance and testing processes
• How to identify resources available to help with viability assessments and technical reviews
• How to incorporate full life-cycle validation and verification into architectural thinking
• Identify
• Those who are concerned about the architecture’s quality: the Architect’s target audiences
and stakeholders
• How to determine the validity and viability of an architecture
• How to deal with risk: removal, containment, and acceptance
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
4

Why are Viability and Validation important in Architectural Thinking?
Humans are imperfect
Reviews and
The Unified Method The validation and
and so are solutions
assessments are used
Framework work viability of the
created by them. Fixing
to ensure that the
product for architecture are an
flawed solutions at an
architecture (and its
documenting the important element of
early stage of the
documentation) is
architecture the overall approach to
project is much cheaper
ready, ensuring that it:
assessment is Viability testing across the
than at a later stage.
• can be implemented Assessment. whole solution life
and delivered – cycle.
Viability
• satisfies the
functional
requirements and
qualities – Validation
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
5

Common causes of troubled projects
Project Design
• Fixed price for combined phases
• Vague or misunderstood completion criteria
• Customer responsibilities not clearly identified and documented
• Assumptions not clearly identified and documented
Summary
• Concessions during negotiations
• Pricing concessions, “low-balling”
The common causes for troubled projects are known, and
• Poorly written proposals or SOWs
almost all are avoidable.
• Inaccurate project estimates
• Not performing QA reviews
Remember:
• Lack of transition, marketing to delivery
• Viability assessments and other forms of validation and
QA can help prevent your project from becoming
troubled.
Project Delivery
• The lists and assessments cannot help unless the
• Project skills deficiencies
recommended actions are taken up. As an Architect,
• Lack of, or inadequate, project management
take the lead.
• Not performing QA reviews and action plans
• Lack of line management oversight and support
• Not implementing or exercising change control
• Starting a phase before completing the preceding phase
• Unplanned turnover of key project team members
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
6

Even most well thought solution are imperfect
Cost Information
Budgets are limited. Even if “As you know more, you
a project starts off well- know more”. New
funded, new cost constraints information: requirements,
may cause solution legislation, competition
architectures to change causes change to the
radically from initial design. business. The architecture
must change to
accommodate new
information constantly.
Skilled resources Time
Throughout a long-lived Architects never have
project, staff comes and sufficient time, particularly
goes. at the beginning of the
project when they have the
most influence.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
7

Table of Contents
Introducing and objectives
→ Viability
↘ Validation
↘ Approaches to viability and validation
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
8

How to approach the viability assessment
Solution Architects performing the Viability Assessment1:
• Assess the architecture. Does it fit the wider context? Does it satisfy the wider needs of the enterprise:
• As-is operational environment
• To-be enterprise architecture
• Confirm that the deployed solution will be operable and maintainable with operations
• Understand the context of the architecture. What are the key requirements and commitments?
• Assess whether the proposed solution is possible:
• Can it be designed and developed within the available means?
• Will it work? Will it perform? Will it be available?
• Determine the project team's ability to deliver.
• Are the right resources in place to ensure success?
• Is the necessary infrastructure in place?
• Identify and assess technical risks.
• What risks must be raised and formally managed? What are their probable impacts? How can these be contained?
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
9

Table of Contents
Introducing and objectives
Viability
→ Validation
↘ Approaches to viability and validation
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
10

What is validation?
Considerations:
When examining an architecture’s validity, consider the following:
• Does it do what is required of it? Does it meet the sponsor’s needs?
• Does it do it well enough? Is it over engineered, or is it vulnerable in some way?
Acceptance criteria
Solution Architects ensure that the proposed solution is acceptable to the various stakeholders:
• The key criterion is that it satisfies the Functional and Nonfunctional requirements
• This is achieved through the use of Requirements Traceability and Verification Matrix (RTVM). RTVM is used throughout the whole project, not just at the end
RTVM
Requirements Traceability and Verification Matrix
• Ensures completeness of architecture and design through mapping of the requirements (both FRs and NFRs) to the solution components
• Provides the basis for test planning and execution
• Provides a framework for risk management and mitigation
• Provides the basis of clear and timely client communication with regard to schedule, risk, and financial impacts
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
11

Validation is not an after the fact concern; it is addressed throughout the project
The testing V model and system engineering baseline reviews are a good starting point for planning validation and
verification activities.
The V model ensures that all tests relate to requirements, and all requirements have an associated test case.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
12

Table of Contents
Introducing and objectives
Viability
Validation
→ Approaches to viability and validation
↘ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
13

IBM manages overall project viability using CVM
TDA and ITR (for complex, cross-LOB, and/or cross-IOT deals) are quality checkpoints1
• Validate that the integrated end-to-end proposed solution will fulfill client requirements, is technically viable, and can be delivered by IBM
• Validate that the integrated project estimates and schedules being proposed are complete and reasonable
• Identify and assess the technical risks, with containment plans in place to mitigate the technical risks
• Led by an Architect within the cross-LOB Solution Design Architect community
1These are not mandatory. Some business units mandate them if the engagement size exceeds certain clip level.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
14

An approach to risk assessment: IBM GSRisk tool
IBM GS Risk is a risk management tool that is available for all
IBMers through w3. Originally developed for IBM Consulting
engagements, GS Risk asks a large number of questions relating
to the technical and delivery elements of the proposed solution:
• Team Skills: Has the team used the proposed toolset before?
• Requirements: Did IBM develop the requirements or are we
relying on the customer or a third party to develop them?
• Technologies: Are the proposed technologies mature? Are we
relying on third-party hardware or software for all or part of
the solution?
GS Risk then assigns a risk assessment for the proposal that is
Sample question in a GS Risk
used as input to the pricing process
assessment for an AMS project
• Risk assessment is one of the key inputs to pricing
considerations. High risk attracts a higher price category.
• Don’t be afraid of medium to high risk. IBM Consulting
projects come under the medium or higher risk categories
when first assessed.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
15

Assessments should also address assumptions, issues, risks and dependencies: RAID
Assumption
Risk
Things that the Solution Architect has taken on faith or
A possibility of something (usually negative) happening within the
otherwise have no direct reason to be thought of as true.
duration of a project
Often, assumptions are implicit but are not recognized as such
• Assumptions have to be verified and then become
requirements or constraints. If found to be incorrect, the
solution needs to be re-assessed.
Dependency
Issue
Something that is causing or will cause the solution to deviate
Something that a project expects to be in place or resolved
from the requirements baseline
before the project completes. Dependencies may be:
• Issues have to be addressed, and recommendations for their
• Business-centric: “The market will be ready for this project.”
resolution have to be established, agreed, and acted upon.
“The legislator will clarify that this approach to data sharing is
legal.”
• IT-centric: “IBM will fix this bug.” “We’ll find a way of
synchronizing these databases.”
• Solution-centric: “The security server has the capacity to take
our extra load.” “The warehouse management system will be
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025 ready in time.”
16

Table of Contents
Introducing and objectives
Viability
Validation
Approaches to viability and validation
→ Summary and references
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
17

Summary
A “good” architecture Architectural Validity and viability Assessments can follow a
well-known approach: Issues,
must be valid – i.e. assessment includes must be assessed
Risks, Dependencies and
solution to satisfy the asking questions to throughout the project,
assumptions:
requirements, and be challenge the as well as before
viable – can be architecture and (presales), and after • Issues need to be resolved,
or architecture needs to be
delivered and will work. associated delivery (operations).
re-assessed.
approach. A working
• Risks that are of high
architectural process
probability and/or high
delivers the base for a impact must be removed,
contained, or accepted.
viable solution and its
• Dependencies need to be
assessment.
documented and managed
during solution delivery.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
18

References for viability and risk assessment
IBM Unified Method Framework: https://yourlearning.ibm.com/activity/PLAN-9740404306B5
• Viability Assessment guidelines from method
• RTVM guidelines from method
• Solution Assurance: https://yourlearning.ibm.com/activity/LT-4616
Quality Assurance
• IBM Global Services Worldwide Quality Assurance Course https://yourlearning.ibm.com/activity/ALM-
COURSE_3954973
Risk assessment
• GS Risk tool: https://w3.ibm.com/#/apps/gsrisk
• Managing Risk: Methods for Software Development, Hall E., Addison-Wesley, 1998, ISBN 0-201-25592-8
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
19

Thank you
IBM, the IBM logo, and ibm.com are trademarks or
registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation in the United States, other
countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked
terms are marked on their first occurrence in this
information with a trademark symbol (® or ), these
symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law
trademarks owned by IBM at the time this information
was published. Such trademarks may also be
registered or common law trademarks in other
countries. A current list of IBM trademarks is available
on the Web at "Copyright and trademark information"
at [OMG-SPEM06]
www.ibm.com/legal/copytrade.shtml.
Other company, product, or service names may be
trademarks or service marks of others.
20

