Architectural
Decisions and
Principles

Table of Contents
→ Introduction and objectives
↘ What are architectural decisions and principles?
↘ Pragmatic architecture decision making
↘ Summary
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
2

Learning Objective
At the end of this module, you should be able to:
• Define architectural decisions and architectural principles
• Describe how Architects use decisions and principles
• Understand best practices (e.g. alternatives should be well researched) and things to avoid (e.g.
single alternative decisions) when making architectural decisions
• Understand why solution proposals are not always acceptable to clients
• Describe how to apply proven optimization patterns to make your solutions simpler, cheaper,
and faster to deliver
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
3

Table of Contents
↗ Introduction and objectives
→ What are architectural decisions and principles?
↘ Pragmatic architecture decision making
↘ Summary
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
4

What is an architectural decision?
Often, there is more than one possible solution option to a given architectural problem. This includes components
and their relationships, choice of technology, assigning functionality to various components, making placement
decisions for components hosted within various infrastructure nodes and so on. The options may have different
costs associated with them; the extent they satisfy various requirements and may present different ways of balancing
competing stakeholders’ concerns.
Architectural decisions enable architects to:
• Formally document the critical choices that they make in their creation of the solution
• Understand and agree why the solution looks the way it does.
Architectural decisions:
• Make explicit the rationale and justification of the decisions made
• Help ensure the solution satisfies both functional and non-functional requirements and if it does not, help making it
explicit to the stakeholders
• Prevent unnecessary rework throughout the solution delivery life cycle
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
5

Architectural decisions should be formally documented and managed
Architectural Decisions must be properly documented, preferably using a standard template.
Their elements are as follows:
• The architectural decision: Written as a statement; for example: “The system will use the Messaging integration
pattern to communicate with the XYZ application.”
• Unique identifier: A unique code that unambiguously identifies the decision; for example: “AD-065.”
• Issue or problem: A description of the situation over which a choice has to be made; for example: “How should the
system integrate with the XYZ application?”
• Assumptions: What is believed to be true about the context of the problem, constraints on the solution, and so on;
for example: “The XYZ application can support a messaging interface.”
• Alternatives: If there are no alternatives, then it can’t be an architectural decision. An enumerated list of alternatives
and explanations; for example: “1 – File transfer, 2 – Messaging.”
• Decision: The decision taken; for example: “Alternative 2 is chosen.”
• Justification: Why the decision was made; for example: “Messaging provides reliable, asynchronous program-to-
program communication.”
• Implications: The consequences and impacts of the decision taken or architectural option chosen on other elements
or aspects of the solution; for example: 1. An integration server node will be required, 2. An additional layer will exist
that must be accounted for in performance modelling.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
6

Architectural decision best practices
Architectural Decisions are
#1 State the to-be decision as a
grouped together in an
question
Architectural Decisions
Register work product
#2 Alternatives should be well
researched keeping immediate
#4 Clearly state the
and future requirements. In
assumptions which are
some instances, a Proof of
influencing the decision
Concept may be recommended
#5 Implications affecting other
architectural decisions must be
documented
#3 Decision must be in line with
the Architecture Principle #6 Key stakeholders and
approvers documented as
agreeing
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
7

Decisions and principles: What’s the difference?
Decisions and principles have much the same effect on a solution’s architecture: They both represent some design
constraint to which the solution must conform
Their source is very different:
• Architectural decisions are made within the context of the development of the solution’s architecture.
• Architectural principles are imposed from outside the context of the solution architecture; they are often part of the
enterprise’s Enterprise Architecture.
For any given solution architecture, architectural decisions and architectural principles often carry equal weight.
• It can be the case that they are subsequently in conflict, requiring architectural governance processes to ensure that
the correct resolution is found.
Principles are defined by the enterprise as a whole, as a powerful means of ensuring that all their otherwise independent
solutions fit together.
If an enterprise recognizes a project’s architectural decision as being generally applicable, then the decision may be adopted
as a principle.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
8

Architectural principles are part of a “guidance framework” that also include policies
and guidelines (1 of 2)
Policies, principles, and guidelines* provide a framework within which an enterprise or program can direct the program or
project team, so that the target IT system fits within the broader context, conforming to legal and “best practice” requirements.
Policy
• An enterprise-wide statement of how things will be done. Often legally binding and imposed from outside the enterprise.
Non-conformance is likely to be a legal offence or have equivalent consequences such as dismissal or financial
punishment.
– Data protection, health and safety, and industry regulations
• Exceptions cannot be granted: alternative must be found to ensure policy is adhered to.
Principle
• An enterprise-wide rule which an organization will use to make architectural decisions. Usually determined from within the
enterprise or at the divisional or some other “supra-program” level.
– Data distribution that affects operations, “Buy not Make” that affects Application Development, and Single sign-on
that affects security management
• Exceptions can be granted: While usually written “you must…,” principles may conflict or be at variance with
requirements.
*This vocabulary may not be the same for your client, but the three “levels” are usually there.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
9

Architectural principles are part of a “guidance framework” that also include policies
and guidelines (2 of 2)
Guideline
• Rarely binding, an enterprise-wide statement of best practice, giving solution architects the opportunity to adopt
consistent approaches to architectural challenges.
• Could be the same examples as principles but would be missing explicit motivation and implication statements
• Formal exceptions are not required.
*This vocabulary may not be the same for your client, but the three “levels” are usually there.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
10

Principles are often “hard” to conform to; they usually focus on the needs of the
enterprise and not the project
Principles are designed to change behavior, often away from the narrow needs of the project “live by New Year’s day”
toward the needs of the enterprise “profitable at the end of next year”.
They, therefore, have a clear structure aimed at explaining why they are the way they are and their consequences for
the Architect:
Name
• A short name or title to identify the principle
Statement
• What the principle is
Motivation
• Why the principle is the way it is; the rationale or impetus behind the enterprise wanting its systems to be architected this way
Implication
• The consequences of the principle both on the enterprise which is always positive and, on the program, sometimes implying
additional cost
• This will increase total cost of acquisition, but it will reduce the total cost of ownership.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
11

Common mistakes (or pitfalls) defining Architectural principles and decisions
Architectural Decisions:
• Undocumented, unclear, or ambiguous decision
• Single alternative decision
• Inclusion of design guidance and code snippets
• Missing dependencies or reference between two or more related decisions
• Decisions scattered in design documents
• Not following a standard approval process for decisions, especially decisions requiring exception approval
Principles:
• Not knowing what the enterprise’s standards and principles are, when creating the solution
• Not discussing deviation from an architecture principle with the governance board, for exception approval process
• Not following a standard approval process for proposal and adoption of new principles
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
12

Table of Contents
↗ Introduction and objectives
↗ What are architectural decisions and principles?
→ Pragmatic architecture decision making
↘ Summary
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
13

Pragmatic and fit for purpose Architecture Decision making (1 of 2)
Too often, our solution proposals would work – but they don’t win…
• IBM is good at solutioning but we don’t always win the deal
• Often we take a broad interpretation of scope
I would
• We assume a good solution will trump a cheaper one
like to
buy a car
• And then we lose on price
• Other bidders find a way to get to the right cost by making
Nice, but
I only have
different assumptions
$25k
During solution design, the architect should “start with the winning price and see what can go into the solution”
rather than “start with a winning solution and see what can be slimmed to bring cost down.”
Late cost cutting can turn good solutions bad
• Price often appears for the first time at the end of the bid
• And comes as a nasty surprise
• Then there is a tendency to chop important pieces out
• And we end up with something unworkable
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
14

Pragmatic and fit for purpose Architecture Decision making (2 of 2)
As you define your solution, you should apply proven optimization patterns to help identify alternative
approaches or re-use opportunities to ensure that your proposed solution:
• Will work – and is priced to win
• Uses appropriate assets and accelerators to speed up delivery and improve quality
• Is not over-engineered
• Follows solid architectural patterns and approaches
• Addresses the appropriate scope and requirements
• Differentiates IBM in the eyes of the client
Shape your solution to fit a target cost
• Set a target cost
• Do basic solution shaping
• Allocate cost targets to major solution parts
• Map key requirements and fully-loaded costs to the solution outline as it is created
• You need to lead on this … don’t expect it to be BAU or in IBM process: it isn’t
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
15

Applying solution patterns improve our chance of winning
Pattern Area # Pattern Name Description
Value 1 Check Value Proposition Use Value Proposition Workshop technique. Align value to delivery schedule/capability.
Proposition
2 Simplify the Architecture Is the solution over-engineered? Reduce architectural elegance where it isn’t really needed or adds little
value. Simplify complex architectures and excessive infrastructure layers.
3 Breakthrough the Design Take a different view of the applications and operational designs: apply Osborne’s checklist, e.g.:
Positive transactions to negative ones, physical updates to logically updated, etc.
Simplification
4 Integrate the Facilities Integrate Service Delivery organization, reduce management overhead. Consolidate technology to
make best use of the hardware, sharing services, reduce duplication of functionality
5 Rightshape the Platforms and Downsize processors, change platforms or introduce different platforms. Challenge accepted dogma
Processors around platform selection. Select platforms to minimize Application Development or Service Delivery
TCO.
6 Re-use Existing Assets Utilize existing assets including architecture components, tools, processes, components and others
including external assets.
7 Recycle Existing Code Use existing code or legacy applications through wrappering or re-engineering rather than rewriting
Assets
8 Apply Frameworks or Apply a framework or a defined rigid development processes with work-product templates or a skeleton
Skeletons program approaches.
9 Optimize the Application Categorize functions into critical ones and non-critical ones, and apply the easiest Application
Development environment Development environment to the latter. If suitable, use Agile approaches to deliver value sooner
Delivery 10 Optimize the Delivery Model Utilize a 3-tier delivery model (onsite, local support centers & global support centers), exploit use of low
cost resources.
11 Rationalize SW/HW License Ensure that software (and hardware) acquisition is timed appropriately through the project lifecycle.
Lifecycle
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
16

Pattern 1: Check the value proposition
• We engineer solutions based on value propositions
• Running a separate value proposition workshop may be appropriate for large deals, but
to develop value propositions for smaller deals, consider:
▪ Confirming the customer wants and needs
▪ Identifying value propositions – with at least one value proposition addressing
Missed a bit?
each ‘wants and needs’ statement Value
proposition
▪ Identifying IBM differentiators (“Wow!” factors)
▪ Defining resources and capabilities required - leveraging all appropriate IBM
brands and capabilities
• Set the high-level value proposition early and align the solution to it
• Aligning the solution and value proposition will take out cost and improve the value
proposition
Solution
• The earlier the client can start realizing major components of their business case, the
Why are
greater the perceived value of the overall solution is likely to be. we building
this bit?
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
17

Pattern 2: Simplify the Architecture
Reduce architectural elegance where it isn’t really needed or adds little value. Simplify complex architectures
and excessive infrastructure layers.
Complex Architecture Simple Architecture
Appl.1 Appl.2 Appl.1 Appl.2 Appl.3
Appl.3
Try to simplify And compare required efforts
Select the best-fit simple architecture to satisfy the needs and service-levels. Avoid accommodating
excessive layering.
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
18

Pattern 3: Rightshape the platforms and processors
• Consider upsizing as well as downsizing for traditional
on-premises hosting. Downsizing does not always
result in the lowest TCO.
• Consider cloud to support all or parts of the workload:
dev/test, production, “cloudburst” of production using
hybrid cloud, etc
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
19

Table of Contents
↗ Introduction and objectives
↗ What are architectural decisions and principles?
↗ Pragmatic architecture decision making
→ Summary
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
20

Summary
Architectural decisions help the Solution Architect communicate why the solution architecture is the way it is, across the scope of the solution:
• To facilitate design reviews and sign-off
• To minimize architectural rework during the program life cycle
• To ensure that the solution can be maintained and enhanced by architects in the future
Architectural principles help the Enterprise Architect communicate enterprise-wide decisions on the architectures of the enterprise’s systems,
across the scope of the enterprise:
• To maximize the usefulness of the enterprise’s IT investments
• To minimize the cost of operating and maintaining these systems
• To optimize the fit between business requirements and IT solutions
• Solution “rightsizing” adds value for our clients by helping to find the least costly means to deliver on the client’s needs
• Encourage designing to a cost point as opposed to cost scrubbing after the design is complete
• Applies proven optimization patterns to help identify alternative approaches or re-use opportunities
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
21

References
Solution optimization
• Solution OPtimization (SOP) Technique: https://w3.ibm.com/w3publisher/integrated-cognitive-solution-design/sop
• Global Solution OPtimization (SOP) Technique Education
• Solutioning to a Price Point
IBM Confidential © IBM Corporation 2025
22

Thank you
IBM, the IBM logo, and ibm.com are trademarks or
registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation in the United States, other
countries, or both. If these and other IBM trademarked
terms are marked on their first occurrence in this
information with a trademark symbol (® or TM), these
symbols indicate U.S. registered or common law
trademarks owned by IBM at the time this information
was published. Such trademarks may also be
registered or common law trademarks in other
countries. A current list of IBM trademarks is available
on the Web at "Copyright and trademark information."
Java and all Java-based trademarks and logos are
trademarks or registered trademarks of Oracle and its
affiliates.
Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United
States, or other countries, or both. Microsoft, Excel,
PowerPoint, Project, Visio, Word, and Windows are
trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the United
States, other countries, or both. UML is a registered
trademark of Object Management Group, Inc. in the
United States and/or other countries. TOGAF and
UNIX are registered trademarks of The Open Group in
the United States and other countries. Other company,
product, and service names may be trademarks of IBM
or other companies. Citrix is a trademark of Citrix
Systems, Inc. and one or more of its subsidiaries, and
may be registered in the United States Patent and
Trademark Office and in other countries.
23

